---
title: Binomial Model
author: Keith A. Lewis
institute: KALX, LLC
classoption: fleqn
fleqn: true
abstract: Discrete time random walk.
...

\newcommand\FF{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand\RR{\mathbf{R}}
\newcommand\NN{\mathbf{N}}
\newcommand\LL{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\Var}{\operatorname{Var}}

Binomial models are the simplest example of a [stochastic process](sp.html).
They use 

Let $(Y_j)$ be [independent](ind.html) random variables with $P(Y_j = 0) = P(Y_j = 1) = 1/2$.
_Random walk_ at time $n$ is $V_n = Y_1 + \cdots + Y_n$ with $V_0 = 0$.
The sample space is $\Omega = \{0,1\}^\infty$ where $Y_j(\omega) = \omega_j$ where $\omega = (\omega_j)$.
The algebra generated by $Y_0, \ldots, Y_n$ can be identified with $\mathcal{A}_n = \{0,1\}^n$
indicating the outcome of each $Y_j$, $1\le j\le n$.

__Exercise__. _Show $P(V_n = k) = C(n,k)/2^n$, $k = 0, 1, \ldots, n$_.

_Hint_. $C(n,k) = n!/(n-k)!k!$ is the number of choices of $k$ items out of $n$ items.


Fix $\nu\colon\NN\to\RR$ and let $v_j(i) = E[\nu(V_n)\mid V_j = i]$.

__Exercise__. _Show $v_j(i) = v_{j+1}(i)/2 + v_{j+1}(i + 1)/2$_.

_Hint_. Use $V_{j + 1} = V_j + Y_{j+1}$ to show
$\{V_j = i\} = \{V_{j+1} = i\} \cup \{V_{j+1} = i + 1\}$



Define _symmetric random walk_ $W_n = n - 2V_n$. Let $X_j = 1 - 2Y_j$ so
$W_n = X_1 + \cdots X_n$. Note $P(X_j = 1) = P(X_j = -1) = 1/2$.

__Exercise__. _Show $E[W_n] = 0$ and $\Var(W_n) = n$_.

_Hint_ $E[X_j] = 0$ and $\Var(X_j) = 1$.


__Exercise__. _Show $E[e^{s W_n}] = \cosh^n s$_.

_Hint_. Recall $\cosh s = (e^s + e^{-s})/2$.


The _binomial model_ for underlying $F$ with $n$ steps is $F = f e^{s W_n/\sqrt{n}}/\cosh^n(s/\sqrt{n})$.

__Exercise__. _Show $E[F] = f$ and $\Var(\log F) = s^2$_.


Let $Z_j = e^{sX_j/\sqrt{n}}/\cosh(s/\sqrt{n})$ and $F_j = f\Pi_{i=1}^j Z_i$.

__Exercise__. _Show $(F_j)$ is a martingale and $F_n = F$_.

_Hint_. Show $E_j[F_{j+1}] = F_jE[Z_{j+1}]$. Recall $E[X\mid\mathcal{A}] = E[X]$
if $X$ is independent of the algebra $\mathcal{A}$.

## American Option

An _American option_ on a futures with price $F_t$ at time $t$ specifies
a payoff function $\nu$ and an expiration $T$.  At any time $t\le T$
the option holder can _exercise_ the option and receive a cash
flow of $\nu(F_t)$ at time $t$.
We want to compute $v = \max_{\tau\le T}E[\nu(F_\tau)]$ where $\tau$ is a stopping time.
Recall $\tau$ is a stopping time if and only if
$A_t = \{\tau = t\}$ is measurable at time $t$, $t\ge0$.

Assume the option can only be exercised at discrete times $0\le t_0 < t_1 \cdots < t_n = T$.
This makes the option _Bermudan_, somewhere between American and European.
Let $v_j = \max_\tau E_{t_j}[\nu(F_\tau)\mid \tau \ge t_j]$
At time $t_j$ the option holder can exercise and receive
$\nu(F_{t_j})$ or continue to hold the option and receive $v_{j+1}$ at $t_{j+1}$.
We should exercise at $t_j$ when $\nu(F_{t_j}) > E_{t_j}[v_{j+1}]$.

__Exercise__. _Show $v_n = \nu(F_{t_n}) = \nu(F_T)$_.


Using the procedure above determines $v_j$ for $j < n$
and we can compute $v_0 = \max_\tau E[\nu(F_\tau)]$.
